                  GAME No. 23

        White: Yates.       Black: Esser.

              French Defence.

          1. P-K4           P-K3
          2. P-Q4           P-Q4
          3. Kt-QB3         Kt-KB3
          4. B-Kt5          PxP
          5. BxKt           PxB

If the Queen recaptures, White obtains too great an advantage in
development, and therefore Black submits to the doubling of his
pawns. It is doubtful if this means a handicap, although the
King’s side gets broken up. For Black keeps his two Bishops, a
powerful weapon, unless White succeeds in developing swiftly an
attack on the King’s side. The present game is instructive and
shows the chances afforded to both sides by the position brought
about by the exchange at KB6.

          6. KtxP           P-KB4

As the KB obtains a long diagonal at Kt2, this advance is
justified. Otherwise there would be strong objections to it, as
the pawn is likely to be subjected to attack, and apart from
that, it gives up command of Black’s K4.

          7. Kt-QB3

Kt-Kt3 would seem more natural, firstly, because Black has
weaknesses on the K side, and White will need his pieces for
attack in that quarter, and secondly, because the QP ought to be
supported by P-B3, as Black will attack it by B-Kt2.

          7. ...            B-Kt2
          8. Kt-B3          Castles
          9. B-B4

If now the Knight were at Kt3, White could play P-B3 and BQ3.
This is the proper place for the B, which might obtain an open
diagonal after P-KKt4.

          9. ...            Kt-B3
         10. Kt-K2          Kt-R4
         11. B-Q3           P-B4
         12. P-B3           P-QB5

P-Kt3 seems preferable, as the text move releases the hold on
White’s Q4. The isolated pawn resulting after 13. PxP is not to
be feared, as the B at Kt2 would have greater efficiency (QR-
Kt1), and White would not be so firmly established in the centre.

         13. B-B2           P-Kt4
         14. Q-Q2

There now ensues an interesting struggle. White builds up an
attack with Q and both Knights and eventually the B  (P-KKt4). If
Black can manage to play his King into safety at R1 in time, and
then occupies the Kt file with his Rooks, he would have the
better of it, his pieces having by far the greater range of
action.

         14. ...               B-Kt2
         15. Q-B4              Q-B3

K-R1 and KR-Kt1 might be considered.

         16. Kt-Kt3            B-KR3
         17. Q-B7              Q-Q1
         18. Q-K5

White gains a move by attacking the Knight’s Pawn. It may seem
far fetched if I now point out that this could not have happened
if from the first Black had given preference to the pawn
formation at QKt3 and B4 instead of Kt4 and B5, though the whole
game would almost certainly have taken a different course. Still,
when advancing a pawn into an unprotected position there always
is the risk of its becoming the object of an attack at an
opportune moment, and whenever the plan of development does not
necessitate such moves they are best avoided.

         18. ...               B-Q4
         19. Kt-R5             Kt-B3?
         20. Q-Kt3ch??

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P |    |    |    |    | #P |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt|    | #P |    |    | #B |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P |    | #B |    | #P |    | ^Kt|
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | #P | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P |    |    | ^Kt| ^Q |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^B |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    | ^K |    |    | ^R |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 134

The last moves have decided the game. Both players have
overlooked that 20. Q-B6 would have won a pawn at least  (QxQ,
21. KtxQch with KtxB and BxP). 20. ... BxKt leads to an immediate
loss by 21. QxB, BxKt; 22. QxB followed by P-KKt4! with an
overwhelming attack.

Instead of 19. ... Kt-B3, Black should have played P-B3, followed
by K-R1 and the occupation of the Kt file by the Rooks. White’s
last move allows him to de this with even greater effect.

         20. ...               K-R1
         21. Q-R3              R-KKt1

Black has now a preponderance of material on the field of battle,
and it can be concluded off-hand that White, not being able to
bring his Rooks into play, must lose.

         22. Kt-Kt3            Q-B3
         23. K-B1

K-K2 is a shade better. But there is no longer any adequate
defence.

         23. ...               R-Kt5
         24. R-K1              QR-KKt1
         25. Kt-K5

Black was threatening BxKt, followed by R-R5 and P-B5

         25. ...               KtxKt
         26. PxKt              Q-Kt4
         27. Q-R5              BxPch
         28. K-Kt1             RxKt?

QxQ and B-K5ch was simple and effective.

         29. RPxR              BxR
         30. QxQ               BxQ
         31. KxB               R-Q1
         32. P-B4

R-Q1 is much more promising, although it means the loss of a pawn
(RxR and B-B8, etc.). With Bishops of different colour the game
is not easy to win even now.

          32. ...             R-Q7
          33. PxB             RxB
          34. R-Q1            RxKtP
          35. R-Q7            K-Kt2
          36. RxRP            R-QB7

He could have played P-Kt5 at once.

          37. R-R5            R-QKt7
          38. P-R4

R-R3 would only have drawn out the agony a little longer.

          38. ...             P-Kt5
              Resigns.
