                  GAME No. 2

       White: Leonhardt. Black: Marshall.

    Falkbeer Counter Gambit (compare p. 35).

          1. P-K4           P-K4
          2. P-KB4          P-Q4
          3. PxQP           P-K5
          4. P-Q3           PxP
          5. QxP            Kt-KB3
          6. Kt-QB3

It would be quite bad to play P-B4 and try to hold the extra pawn
at the expense of development. Black would very soon occupy the
King’s file with his Rook and there would be no time for White to
bring his King into safety, e.g. 6. P-B4, B-QB4; 7. Kt-KB3,
Castles; 8. B-K2, R-K1, and already now there are threats of Kt-
K5 or Kt-Kt5 followed by B-B7ch or Kt-B7.

           6. ...           B-QB4
           7. B-Q2

White would of course like to continue with B-K3 in order to make
a fight for the possession of the diagonal. He would, however,
lose his chance of castling through Black’s Q-K2. This is
detrimental in all such cases where the lines in the centre are
open or likely to be forced open at any time.

          7. ...            Castles
          8. Castles        QKt-Q2
          9. B-K2           Kt-Kt3
         10. B-B3           B-KKt5
         11. B-K3?

White has not yet completed his development, and his first care
should be to bring out his KKt. This he could have done without
difficulty, thus: 11. BxB, KtxB; 12. Kt-R3.  After the move in
the text, Black not only occupies the King’s file but gains a
move in so doing.

         11. ...            BxBch
         12. QxB            R-K1
         13. Q-Q4           Q-Q3

Black’s course is obvious; he must win the QP. The forces will
then be equal in material, but there will remain a

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    |    |    | #R |    | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #Kt|    | #Q |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^Q |    | ^P | #B |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt|    |    | ^B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    | ^K | ^R |    |    | ^Kt| ^R |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 101.

flaw in White’s position, namely the exposed KBP, and this tells
in the ending.

          14. P-KR3

Now the square at KKt3 is unprotected, and this is serious in
view of a probable Knight’s ending, where, moreover, it will
sooner or later be necessary to play P-KKt3 in order to support
the KBP. Both the KKtP and KBP would be weak, with the King on
the other wing, and be under constant threat of being captured.
The game does proceed as indicated, and the simple and logical
manner in which Marshall brings home his advantage in a very
short time shows convincingly how fatal a shattered pawn position
can be for the end-game. Instead of the move in the text, White
should have played BxB followed by Kt-B3, which would have
completed his development without making another pawn move.

          14. ...           BxB
          15. KtxB          QR-Q1
          16. KR-KI         RxR
          17. RxR           QKtxP
          18. KtxKt         KtxKt
          19. P-KKt3        P-KR3

making a loophole for the King. In this case the move is correct,
as the threat of mate ties the Black Rook to his rank. It is
wrong to make a loophole, as weak players are fond of doing, as
early as possible “in case,” before it is shown that there will
be a need for it, or that there will be a Rook ending.

          20. P-R3

White is afraid of playing 20. QxP on account of Kt-Kt5, which
threatens KtxBP followed by Q-QB3. 21. QxP would not be a
sufficient defence because of Q-B4 threatening mate, and on the
other hand 21. Q-R4 would conjure up a dangerous attack,
beginning with P-QKt4. When the players castle on different
wings, there is always the danger of the opponent sacrificing
pawns and opening up files for his Rooks and Q against the
castled King. The game then assumes a wild character, and as
matters are generally settled one way or another in the middle-
game, end-game considerations, both with regard to number and
position of pawns, can be disregarded. Experience has shown that
the player who develops his attack first is likely to win, and
that it is of little use to submit tamely to an assault of this
kind without attempting a counter attack.

Such games are very difficult for the beginner to understand.
There is about them something violent and difficult to estimate,
and years of practice are necessary in order to gain the judgment
required for weighing up the possibilities of attack and counter
attack, where the Kings have castled on opposite wings.

          20. ...            P-R3
          21. R-Q1           Kt-B3
          22. QxQ            RxQ
          23. RxR            PxR
          24. Kt-Q4          Kt-K5
          25. Kt-K2          K-B1

The Black King now pushes forward irresistibly, and attacks the
weakened pawns on the King’s wing. The White King cannot get any
nearer, as a check by the Black Kt would win a pawn at once. The
end is easy.

          26. P-B3           K-K2
          27. K-B2           K-K3
          28. P-Kt3          Kt-B7
          29. Kt-Q4ch        K-B3
          30. P-KR4          P-KR4

Now the P at Kt3 is “backward” and therefore lost.

          31. P-B4        Kt-K5
          32. Kt-K2       K-B4
          33. K-Q3        Kt-B7ch
          34. K-B3        K-Kt5
          35. P-Kt4       Kt-K5ch
          36. K-Q4        KtxP
              Resigns.